George H: Okay. So they actually don't know this. But David is one of our 3 eir. So we've yet to introduce or unveil our eirs. But yes, David is one of them. So you guys are going to be so grateful after you hear his talk that he's not going anywhere. He's going to be with you guys for the whole program, because you definitely want him as a resource and then the other 2 ae, are going to meet on the retreat. David sadly had a prior commitment. So we're very sad that you can't join us. But maybe next time.
George H: okay. So today's workshop is one that we've done for a long time. David was with us back when we did tech search Chicago. He's a long time member of our network, and we've always had him do a kind of rundown of all legal and fundraising jargon that you need to know to kind of level set everybody, because everybody has different experience coming in. Some of you have started companies before some of you. This is your 1st time going into business, and we want everyone to understand when we throw out
George H: acronyms or jargon that might seem confusing. David does a great job at explaining it. He's a professor at several universities as well. So you'll be able to tell when he starts lecturing, but feel free to ask questions. David will be here for anything that you need while you're in your presentation. And then yeah. So by the end, hopefully, you guys will be able to all have the same knowledge about all of this stuff.
George H: And then, if you have any further questions, David will be a resource reading that program. So we're very lucky
George H: is also something that we used to do like
George H: during week, 3 or 4 back in Texas, Chicago, and then overwhelmingly in our survey is people wrote like you need to talk talk during week one. So for the past, maybe like 4 programs, we've had David come in for week, one because this is like one of the best things to front load. That's what our founders said in their feedback. So this is a great week. One experience for you guys. I will hand it over to David, we're recording David. I hope that's okay.
David Willbrand: Yeah.
George H: Okay. Thank you.
David Willbrand: Thank you for the introduction. Liliana. Hey, everybody!
David Willbrand: Sorry that I'm not with you in person. I wish that I were, and I'm looking forward to meeting each of you, one on one as Liliana said. I've been doing this talk or a version of this talk for many years. For many tech stars, cohorts
David Willbrand: along with some other accelerators and universities and other kind of entrepreneurship support organizations. It came out of my legal practice. So I was in private practice for a long time and represented entrepreneurs and startups venture capital firms, university spin out programs, tech transfer that kind of thing.
David Willbrand: For the last 3 and a half years I've been in house as the 1st chief legal officer of a company called Picasso. We are a prop tech unicorn we were born January 1, st 2020. I joined. I represented the company when I was still perched as a law firm partner. So I was outside counsel, and then came on. Came on full time. April of 2021
David Willbrand: so that is now my day job is
David Willbrand: running all matters, legal fundraising, capital markets, and otherwise at Picasso, and then on the side, as Leon mentioned,
David Willbrand: working with you all at techstars, and then I teach
David Willbrand: startups and venture capital at the University of Michigan Law School. Part of the reason why that might be relevant to you to the extent that you have an interest in this, and want to continue your education, so to speak.
David Willbrand: is that every week I post a summary of my lecture notes from those classes. So you know, startups is like a 12 week course in the fall venture capital is a 12 week course in the spring. I make it very linkedin friendly, so it's certainly not. Doesn't require you to be sort of Jd aspirational to understand it. But I've just found over time that founders are super thirsty for this information, and so the extent I can make it
David Willbrand: accessible. That way. I'm happy to do it, so feel free to follow me, or just check in every once in a while on my profile. Profile on Linkedin. And you can see what we're up to, and just maybe pick up some pieces of knowledge.
David Willbrand: One final qualifying point.
David Willbrand: I'm going to do this by a whiteboard. We call it a chalk talk, because it actually started on a chalkboard, and it started on a chalkboard because I used to use a deck. But, like many of you when I went in far too many times and had AV issues
David Willbrand: and couldn't get the projector to talk to my computer, to talk to my software. I finally just threw up my hands and said, You know what if I show up with dry erase markers that still have some ink left in them. I should be fine. So I started doing it manually that way. Actually found I really liked it. And so it's not really a true chalk talk. I guess the 1st couple were chalk was chalk
David Willbrand: but it's a whiteboard talk, but that just doesn't have the same ring to it. I'm gonna turn my screen here shortly, so you'll get a little bit nauseous for a moment while I adjust. I cannot see you while I do this. So if you have questions, please
David Willbrand: scream them out, or you know, throw something heavy at Liliana to let her know that. You want to to ask me something. I would say this, I'm gonna put up my email address here as 1st things. First, st
David Willbrand: I will respond to. I always respond to questions. You know they they come to me directly offline. So if the questions are things like, I already hate my co-founder. Maybe we don't want to air those out right here in the room in front of everybody, unless you just are like totally down for that kind of drama and transparency. And I'm here for that, I guess.
David Willbrand: But we could save that for email. The other might be is, if you feel like there's something particularly unique to you or advanced.
David Willbrand: The whole point of this talk is to really level set. So I really do start like very kind of 1 0, 1 basics. I find that even people that think that they have advanced knowledge find that there are probably some gaps and holes that going back and revisiting some concepts that they think they understand is is useful and helpful. But if you ask questions that are kind of 500 level questions that's awesome. But let's do that offline just to make sure that we're we're keeping pace
David Willbrand: with everybody in the room, and we're not. We're not getting too far out over our skis. But that being said, if you've got sort of, you know straightforward questions of general applicable applicability. And I'm I'm happy to field those and would love for this to be as much of a conversation as it is a presentation. I do love the sound of my own voice.
David Willbrand: But occasionally I do need to take a breath, and your questions provide a good opportunity for that. So.
George H: If you guys have questions, you can raise your hand, and Chloe will call on you and then pause. Make sure that you have something to take notes with, because he's going to be drawing it all over. You're gonna want to make sure that you can either drop down on your laptop or on notebook ipad, something like that. This is really valuable stuff.
George H: And again, this will be recorded. So you'll be able to go back and review the actual chocolate later down the line. Yeah. And you usually send us pictures right? David.
David Willbrand: Yeah.
George H: Yeah, beautiful pictures of the creation that you'll make on the whiteboard. Okay, I think everyone's about ready.
David Willbrand: Alright.
David Willbrand: Can you see my screen.
George H: Yep.
David Willbrand: Awesome. Okay. So as promised, let's start with my email address
David Willbrand: David
David Willbrand: at Picasso, PACA. so.com.
David Willbrand: As you all know there are lots of downsides to being
David Willbrand: a founder or a startup company. Og,
David Willbrand: you know, debilitating
David Willbrand: mental scars and emotional trauma among them. But you do get an email address with your 1st name. So that's pretty awesome and makes it all worthwhile. I think so. Feel free to ping me there. I would be happy to take your questions.
David Willbrand: So
David Willbrand: I'd like to start this talk, which is in many respects framed as a legal conversation with an accounting concept, because it really does set the stage and lay the groundwork for everything that comes next. And what I like to start with is a balance sheet.
David Willbrand: and when you consider the basic construction of a balance sheet, you have assets on the left.
David Willbrand: and you have liabilities over equity. On the right
David Willbrand: the 2 sides must balance. That's why it's called a balance sheet.
David Willbrand: a way to reflect that mathematically and not just visually, is assets equal liabilities plus equity.
David Willbrand: And then, if you're just feeling
David Willbrand: really, really strong in the stem disciplines, you can fiddle around with that. L input. And you can reflect this equation as assets minus liabilities equals equity. So why do we start here? Well, let's break down the terminology.
David Willbrand: 1st of all.
David Willbrand: move my face.
David Willbrand: Assets and liabilities and equity are
David Willbrand: technical accounting terms, but we can apply commonsensical definitions to them for our purposes, assets all the good stuff in the business.
David Willbrand: It's everything you create. It's everything you build. It's everything you achieve on day one. Your assets are probably 0 or fractions of a penny but over time we're hoping that that number gets quite big liabilities. This is one that we're always attentive to and fearful of.
David Willbrand: That's the bad stuff.
David Willbrand: So liabilities would be what you owe debts and obligations, payments required to be made to lawyers, accountants, employees, contractors, executives, other 3rd parties, suppliers, vendors, etc, etc, etc.
David Willbrand: When you take liabilities, and you subtract them from assets. You get equity. Equity is what is left over. It's the residue, or it is residual.
David Willbrand: This is where you live as the owner.
David Willbrand: And what represents your stake in equity is your stock
David Willbrand: that represents your ownership interest in the company, which is a claim on equity.
David Willbrand: which basically is the result of the equation where you net
David Willbrand: all the liabilities from your assets. Now, if you're operating as a traditional small business in America, you're paying attention to your balance sheet, paying attention to this equation each and every day, because, frankly, this equation goes a long ways toward determining the value of your company. If you have a traditional small business, if this number.
David Willbrand: which ought to be very, very positive in a traditional small business, some multiple of that, and it tends to be a pretty small multiple
David Willbrand: is going to help drive and help everyone understand what your company is worth. And also tell you a lot more about the current
David Willbrand: business for those of us in Startup Land. It's not as relevant assets are still highly aspirational.
David Willbrand: and how they're created and what they are to be, and the value of the company tends to be determined on bases that are completely separate and apart and distinct from whatever might be generated inside of this equation, we determine value based very, very much on futures
David Willbrand: based very, very much on what we think may come. Someday, there's a lot of imagination. There's a lot of creativity. There are hopes and dreams that are built into our valuation expressions. So it's not as relevant for those purposes, but there is a time where it's extremely relevant.
David Willbrand: and that time is M. And A.
David Willbrand: Now M. And A. Means mergers and acquisitions.
David Willbrand: What we're talking about here is when you sell your company.
David Willbrand: Now your company may go public.
David Willbrand: That's an Ipo, an initial public offering, and there are startups that do achieve liquidity for their investors that do have an exit for their investors via an Ipo. An Ipo is not a sale of the company. An Ipo was a transformation of the company.
David Willbrand: When you go through the public offering process, you transition from being a private company
David Willbrand: for securities, law purposes to being a public company for securities. Law purposes. Simply put.
David Willbrand: it means that rather than jumping through all the hoops and finding exemptions that you need to lock into, to raise capital generally from accredited investors as a private company. You now have the ability to raise money broadly from accredited and non accredited investors from retail investors across the board. You can raise it in mass, you can raise large amounts of it, and you can solicit generally you can advertise. You can do whatever you want
David Willbrand: to do all the sorts of things that you weren't able to do as a private company. But of course it comes at a cost. There's a lot of reporting that's required. There's a lot of overhead. There's a lot of expense. It's why you're not a public company today.
David Willbrand: There are some startups that do achieve that kind of escape velocity and get an opportunity for the founders themselves as well as the other investors, to sell their stock once they become public. There's a market for the stock, and they can achieve liquidity that way. But the vast majority of startups
David Willbrand: for the vast majority of startups that achieve liquidity that have an exit. They do so through selling. And generally it's something that we might even further refine and call a trade sale, which means that you're selling to someone in your industry. You tend not to just sell to private equity or a money investor, although that sometimes happens, you tend to sell to somebody else in the field. That is Hotmail selling to Microsoft.
David Willbrand: That is, Instagram selling to Meta that is slack selling to salesforce XYZ. ABC.
David Willbrand: What happens in an M. And a transaction, and I used to teach M. And A. At Michigan, and it was a 3 credit hour class, and we spent 16 weeks. 3 ha week
David Willbrand: digging into what M and A is. It's highly nuanced. It's very tax driven in terms of how it's structured. There are thousands and thousands of ways to skin that poor cat. Maybe the worst metaphor I think we have. I I can't decide if it's worth when we talk about skinning cats or splitting babies, but they're all incredibly violent. And maybe we ought to be a soft kind of society and find different metaphors. But you know, we we.
David Willbrand: we work with what we've got. So there are thousands of ways that but at a super high level, at a super high level. What's fundamentally happening inside of an impact is that someone in your market? Someone in your industry is buying your assets
David Willbrand: and they're giving you cash for it, or they're giving you stock in their company, you know some other property like that. But we'll call a cash equivalent so if Meta gives you stock and Meta sometimes that's called a cash equivalent, because you can generally turn right around and sell it on the stock market. So you're getting cash or cash equivalents for your assets.
David Willbrand: So hopefully.
David Willbrand: this buyer looks at you and says, terrific job
David Willbrand: you're worth gazillions.
David Willbrand: And you say, Thank you. Thank you for what we're going to call those gross proceeds.
David Willbrand: Okay? The full proceeds that were received from that transaction. Thank you for the gross proceeds. Now, what happens? Well, now, you need to pay off your liability.
David Willbrand: Okay? So you still have those left.
David Willbrand: You gotta take care of those. Hopefully.
David Willbrand: The liabilities do not accumulate into a ginormous hopefully. The liabilities are far less than the assets, and if this is a happy outcome they will be, if it's a not so happy outcome. Well, might be a little bit more of a push, but the bottom line is, you just sold your assets for a lot of money. We hope you pay off your liabilities with those gross proceeds hopefully. Not very much money, and whatever's left.
David Willbrand: the net or the net proceeds.
David Willbrand: that goes to equity
David Willbrand: that goes to you
David Willbrand: as an owner.
David Willbrand: Great. Okay, little bit less than this. But hopefully, it's still a big number.
David Willbrand: So now the question becomes, how do we split it up.
David Willbrand: Okay, if it's 1 owner
David Willbrand: pretty easy 100%.
David Willbrand: But what if it's 2 owners? What if it's 8 owners?
David Willbrand: What if it's 14 owners or 50 owners or 200 owners.
David Willbrand: Okay, we call them stockholders.
David Willbrand: We can call them shareholders same thing.
David Willbrand: These are owners of stock or owners of shares. Same thing in the company which gives them a claim to these net proceeds because they have a claim on equity.
David Willbrand: What do we look to?
David Willbrand: Well, the thing that we look to is the cap table.
David Willbrand: The cap table is more than just a day-to-day scorecard.
David Willbrand: The cap table tells us
David Willbrand: how we chop up
David Willbrand: those net proceeds at exit, which means it's super important, because what you don't want to have is a fight.
David Willbrand: You don't want to go through one year, 3 years, 7 years, 12 years of building this business. Get to the point where you have finally found the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, and then find that your cap table is a hot, steaming toxic dumpster fire, and you're not able to discern who owns what?
David Willbrand: In which case you've got a knife fight on your hands, and that's no fun for everyone. So the notion of keeping up with your cap table and ensuring that it's true, correct and complete at all points and times is really important. They are hard to rebuild
David Willbrand: once you've kind of gotten off track and fall and fallen out of the groove. So I would just encourage you, you know. Look, you have a lot of things to do, and focusing on legal and accounting matters shouldn't be 1st and foremost. But if I'm going to give you one or 2 things to say, you know what this is pretty important. It ought to be on the, you know Kpi Ish in terms of your priorities. It's making sure that your cap table is up to date and accurate at all times. That seems obvious.
David Willbrand: and maybe to you you're sort of scratching your head and saying I can't imagine it, it not ever being true, correct, and complete. Well, believe me. I actually see flaky cap tables more often than I see cap tables that are tight. So it's this is a ball gets dropped often, and I would encourage you not to do so so with that Psa out of the way. Let's get into the cap table a little bit.
David Willbrand: So a very basic tap table
David Willbrand: looks like this. And we have our founders here.
David Willbrand: Sorry. It's a very non diverse group. They're all red stick figures. It's a problem.
David Willbrand: So our columns, though. Let's mix it up a little bit. We have shares here. Put a PIN in this. We're gonna come back to it, and we have ownership percentage here.
David Willbrand: The key thing, particularly for initial cap tables. But really for all cap tables throughout. Is this column right here? Why? Because this column tells us how we split up net proceeds.
David Willbrand: We actually don't care about the share numbers as objective inputs. Shares only matter to us on a relative basis shares matter, because they're the means by which we keep score of ownership. But we only care about shares insofar as they translate
David Willbrand: into ownership percentages, because this is what we look to when we're chopping up the net proceeds. So if the net proceeds that we get from the sale of the company
David Willbrand: are 1 billion dollars congratulations.
David Willbrand: If founder A holds 40% of the company and founder B holds 30% and founder C holds 30%. 1st of all, good job.
David Willbrand: it adds up to 100%. You'd be surprised the number of times that it doesn't when I sit down with founders, and they say I own 50, and the other person says, I own 40. And the other person says, I own 30, I'm like, well.
David Willbrand: that's amazing. I give 120% every day, too. But I don't think you're allowed to do that inside of Microsoft. Excel, this is pretty key, and pretty important. This tells us how we split up our 1 billion dollars in net proceeds
David Willbrand: 400 million to founder a 300 million to founder B, 300 million to founder C. No knife fights required very clear, very direct. Everyone's very happy. That's gonna be a fun closing dinner. Those are some really big checks.
David Willbrand: and that's what we look to. This is the whole point of the cap table. Okay, this is why we do it. This is why we. This is why we work with Carta. This is why we try to maintain this. These ownership entries on a day to day basis over the lifespan of the company. It's purely for this moment in time
David Willbrand: to make sure that we've got it right. And it's controversy free.
David Willbrand: Now, I mentioned shares.
David Willbrand: Shares, of course. Tell us what these ownership percentages are.
David Willbrand: And, by the way, because they only matter. Relatively speaking.
David Willbrand: okay, we don't. Necessarily, we're not necessarily tied to a certain convention. So if we want for this company. For instance, if this is how the founders decided that they wanted to chop up
David Willbrand: the ownership of the company, 40%, 30%, 30%, we could say 4 shares, 3 shares, 3 shares, total of 10
David Willbrand: that totally works
David Willbrand: that totally works.
David Willbrand: or we could say 4 million 3 million 3 million for a total of 10 million
David Willbrand: that totally works, too.
David Willbrand: you know, 4 divided by 10 is 40%, 4 million, divided by 10,000,040%.
David Willbrand: So what matters is this?
David Willbrand: What doesn't matter
David Willbrand: is this?
David Willbrand: But, as you probably know.
David Willbrand: in Startup Land
David Willbrand: big numbers
David Willbrand: tend to be the Cultural Convention.
David Willbrand: and there must be a reason for that. There must be a reason for that. It can't just be something that's that's sort of that. That just randomly occurs in some kind of uncorrelated and and unfoundational way, and there is a reason for it, and the reason is not so much among the 3 of you.
David Willbrand: although it does matter, and we'll start to tease the reason now, because it's psychology.
David Willbrand: even for you, even knowing
David Willbrand: that this doesn't matter. And what matters is this
David Willbrand: 4 million sounds a whole lot better than 4.
David Willbrand: It certainly does to yourself, and it really does. When you're talking to your partner, your significant other, your parents, your roommates, your friends. There's a very big difference between telling them that you own 4 shares in your startup, and you own 4 million shares in your startup. You may be making no money. You may be lonely. You may be going through existential anxiety of the sort that you've never experienced in your life. But number one. You've got an email address with your 1st name.
David Willbrand: baller number 2. You've got 4 million shares, Baller. So I mean, this is these things come together in a way that's an emotional lift, and it makes it all worthwhile. Right? The teeter totter balances.
David Willbrand: Kinda so.
David Willbrand: But that's the psychology is everything, and where it really plays is when we start adding more people to the cap table.
David Willbrand: particularly employees and subsequent hires.
David Willbrand: Because here's the deal
David Willbrand: if we have. And let's just make the math easy. Let's just say within this equation.
David Willbrand: we're gonna rub this out a little bit here. So we still need to add up to a hundred percent.
David Willbrand: But we're going to say that these founders had
David Willbrand: 3 shares, 3 shares, 3 shares. Okay, and so they started at 33%, 33%, 33%. Good job still adds up to 109 shares. Now, we're gonna have our 1st hire.
David Willbrand: Another red stick person. Come on, do better. Okay, we need some active diversity in this company. This uniformity is frustrating. Anyhow, we're gonna give them
David Willbrand: a 10% interest in the company. Okay, they're quasi founder. They're super important. And we think they're worth it. So where do we? Where do we insert them? 1st things? First, st
David Willbrand: note that what you have, you have. It stays the same.
David Willbrand: What happens with new people is it's incremental. Okay? So we're adding on top of the pile.
David Willbrand: So they get one share.
David Willbrand: because now 3 plus 3 plus 3 is one. So we no longer have 9 shares.
David Willbrand: Now we have 10 shares.
David Willbrand: because this 4th person has one share. It's also going to impact our ownership percentages right?
David Willbrand: Because now it's not 3 divided by 9, it's 3 divided by 10. So it's 30%, 30%, 30%, 10%. We did it. Okay, we hit the mark
David Willbrand: business solution.
David Willbrand: That's what dilution is, you just went from 33% to 30%.
David Willbrand: Your stock holding stayed the same. Your ownership percentage dropped. It was diluted. It was diluted because you issued one new share of stock
David Willbrand: to that party who just joined.
David Willbrand: Now let's just say, for the sake of argument, that that if at this point in time your company has an attributed value of a million dollars.
David Willbrand: Let's just say that that's that's the way you're valuing the company at the point in time you're bringing in this 1st employee or party number 4. Okay.
David Willbrand: if you give them
David Willbrand: one share, you're telling them that they're getting something worth.
David Willbrand: Let's go to another page one share.
David Willbrand: You're telling them that they're getting something worth a hundred $1,000.
David Willbrand: Okay.
David Willbrand: now they're going to look at that.
David Willbrand: And perhaps they're sophisticated.
David Willbrand: And they understand that that's great.
David Willbrand: And they're excited about this. And they're able to move from the 10%
David Willbrand: to this conversation
David Willbrand: without any kind of friction or issue. But that's extremely rare, because usually what runs through their mind is
David Willbrand: one share is nothing.
David Willbrand: and it's worth $100,000.
David Willbrand: There's no upside left that's even way more than Berkshire, Hathaway
David Willbrand: like, where's the stock going to go from here
David Willbrand: now? We know that it that this is just math, and it's the pie is just not chopped up very much. So there's still a ton of room for this company to grow and for the share value to grow. But superficially.
David Willbrand: emotionally, psychologically.
David Willbrand: it doesn't play out. Well, let's just say, for the sake of argument.
David Willbrand: that we were operating in millions 3 million 3 million 3 million 1 million.
David Willbrand: So going to this
David Willbrand: equation here
David Willbrand: still on 10%.
David Willbrand: But they're getting 1 million shares.
David Willbrand: 1 million shares are worth a hundred $1,000, remember.
David Willbrand: So the price per share is a dime.
David Willbrand: So now you can tell this person who's joining you get 1 million shares
David Willbrand: and they're worth
David Willbrand: 10 cents each.
David Willbrand: This is exactly the same
David Willbrand: from an economic input perspective.
David Willbrand: And if the person you're dealing with is a Vulcan.
David Willbrand: you're good to go. No problem.
David Willbrand: But if they are, if you're dealing with a human being.
David Willbrand: They are definitely picking door number 2
David Willbrand: because it feels different.
David Willbrand: And that's why we operate this way. Because equity incentive compensation is super important stock options, restricted stock, the whole 9 yards super important to startup companies super important to the compensation packages that you offer employees one through
David Willbrand: 10,000.
David Willbrand: They care. They care a lot, and this just feels better.
David Willbrand: So this is what we do, and that's why we do it as simple as that.
David Willbrand: So before I go on. This is probably a good moment to to take the breath and to check in and see if anybody has any questions.
David Willbrand: No question.
George H: Wait. Sorry
George H: any. Go ahead. Yeah. So I had a question about the. So you have. So for my company, we have 15 million shares
George H: total that we can distribute. But we're doing it in like equity plans like the the breakdown. So I guess, like in the 1st equity plan. We only issue.
George H: I guess I forget the exact number, but just for the sake of an example, say like 5 million shares, and then
George H: cause. You only have 15 million shares total throughout the lifespan of your company. Correct.
David Willbrand: So it's it's a good question. So let's let's touch on that point for a moment. What you're saying is that if I were to. Are you a Delaware Corporation.
George H: Yes.
David Willbrand: Okay. Good job. That was the right decision.
David Willbrand: Fun fact. The leading state
David Willbrand: for corporate law out of the 18 hundreds and into the early 19 hundreds was New Jersey. They were very aggressive in creating an efficient and excellent statutory system.
David Willbrand: primarily because they were trying to steal business from the State of New York, given the proximity. But Woodrow Wilson, among many other terrible decisions that Woodrow Wilson made, decided that it was too business friendly. He didn't like business, and he didn't trust capitalism, and so he forced the Legislature to tighten up the laws. So New Jersey kind of lost the monopoly they had. Delaware saw an opportunity, and Delaware jumped into the
David Willbrand: breach. Delaware tweaked its law to to meet and be the law of the State of New Jersey and Katie bar the door. Delaware is now the leading State. By far something like 1 3rd of their State revenues are derived from
David Willbrand: the corporation laws and the Secretary of State's office. That's charged with with handling these materials. So it's big business for the State of Delaware. So anyhow, this is why I don't get invited to many parties, because I think this stuff is cool. But but maybe you're like me, and you think it's interesting. So in Delaware
David Willbrand: you would have filed a certificate of incorporation right? Sometimes we call this your charter.
David Willbrand: and your certificate of incorporation
David Willbrand: said, you know this is what the name of the corporation is. This is its purpose. Super generic. This is. It's registered agent, registered office because you have to have you. We all pay. You know, someone to just sit in Delaware and to take mail for us, because that's required. And then here is
David Willbrand: capital stock.
David Willbrand: and it's going to include the number of authorized to shares.
David Willbrand: The number of authorized shares is a cap.
David Willbrand: Okay, you cannot issue.
David Willbrand: sell award, etc. More than that number of authorized shares. So if your current certificate of incorporation says 15 million shares, that's your cap. So
David Willbrand: maybe what you did. And this is what I would see. A lot of startup companies do
David Willbrand: is your 1st founder has 3 million shares. Your second founder has 3 million shares. Your 3rd founder has 3 million shares. Your plan, your equity plan, your option plan. However, it's structured whatever you want to call it, whatever you have reserved, even if it's not a plan.
David Willbrand: maybe it's just. It's nothing more than an entry on a spreadsheet at this point, which is fine, too. Okay, but what you are allocating for future
David Willbrand: hirees, future contractors whatever is a million shares.
David Willbrand: So you know, the math is very clean. 10 million total. So on and so forth, which means you've got a cushion of 5 million. Right?
David Willbrand: So over time, you can dip into that 5 million, and you can sell shares. From that you can make additional equity awards. You know kind of once you break through the 1 million. But then the question happens, this is like, Well, what about when you get to series a
David Willbrand: what do you do?
David Willbrand: Well, 1st things first, st you don't have any series. A preferred stock yet. We'll talk about preferred stock next, because probably what your certificate of the corporation just says is 15 million common shares, doesn't say anything about preferred shares. So you need to create those shares. So you set aside preferred stock as a class.
David Willbrand: and then you set up the 1st series a series A,
David Willbrand: and you will authorize some series, a shares. Maybe it's 20 million.
David Willbrand: You can do that through an amendment.
David Willbrand: Okay? So this 15 million isn't a forever number. You can change it at any point in time, just by amending your certificate of incorporation which will start to happen a lot. I want to stay at Picaso. We're probably up to our
David Willbrand: 8th or 9th amendment, maybe more at this point. In time it happens a lot you may find that just even before you get to series A that you need more common. You know you do 20 million, you just amend it, you create more authorized shares, and then that gives you more shares to play with inside your cap table, but just never exceed it. Make sure you respect the cap.
George H: I have a question regarding this. What is the benefit of increasing your cap of shares relative to
George H: reorganizing the equity among among the founders.
George H: That is fair
George H: like, suppose you the company cap is 10 million. The number of shares is 10 million, and you want to give an extra 1 million to an extra founder.
George H: but instead of authorizing another 1 million shares, you just reorganize
George H: the current equity among the current founders. So
George H: the final percentage is actually reflecting.
George H: the cap table that you want to see with new founder. So what are the benefits of each of these 2 strategies.
David Willbrand: Yeah, there, I would say, I hear you. And there definitely is an aesthetic attraction to that. But that would be the extent of the benefit would be the aesthetic attraction. And the fact that it's it's got a it's got a nice round number. There's a lot of downside to doing that.
David Willbrand: Now, now, one reason. And this is not as much of an issue now, because we tend to ha handle things electronically through Carter or otherwise. So our shares are something called uncertificated shares. So they're just, you know, entries in a grid. But you know, we used to issue real stock certificates and a lot of companies still do.
David Willbrand: If you were to do this, what you just described, every time you'd have to go back you'd have to grab those stock certificates, you'd have to destroy them, and then you'd have to issue new stock certificates. So there's just an administrative load that's associated with that. But there's a bigger issue. And the bigger issue is there are potential tax consequences to doing that. If you if you're careful
David Willbrand: and you cross all the t's and dot on the i and dot all the eyes. You should be able to thread the needle in tax free ways whenever you structured some kind of reorganization like that. But it's a lot of squeezing a lot of squeezing for very little juice, which is why the absolute
David Willbrand: convention and expectation in the space is just to keep adding shares incrementally, because it's just administratively easier to do. It's not pretty. It's why people end up with cap tables with, you know, very ugly numbers very early. And that just continues and gets worse. So it is not aesthetically pleasing, but it just tends ultimately and on balance to be simpler and more efficient.
David Willbrand: It's a good question, though I get it a lot.
David Willbrand: because there is. There's something about it that feels intuitive, that. Why don't you just cap it? And then just just keep modifying those those share allocations inside of it. Since we're just trying to design and and engineer towards ownership percentages, anyway. But that's the reason.
George H: So I have a question. So if you're going from here 15 million to 20 million, and that's like for your series A, is that an expectation that happens at every raise. Should you avoid trying to do this? So this is just kind of the norm that's like, all right, we're it'll be diluted every time where you should. You be trying to hold on to more of your your slack like maybe you had series A, but series. B. You try to keep it your cap at 20.
David Willbrand: Yeah. So that definitely is the expectation. And it's the it's the expectation. 1st and foremost.
David Willbrand: because you just you just don't know at this point in time. You don't have
David Willbrand: number One. You don't know how many of these shares you're going to need, so you could, you know, try to anticipate it and say that we think we'll need 50 million common, and we think we'll need 50 million preferred.
David Willbrand: But that's gonna cost you some money.
David Willbrand: The Secretary of State of Delaware. There's a reason that you know. A 3rd of their State revenues come from this sort of work, and they they will ding you for big share numbers.
David Willbrand: So you know, you have to pay a little bit extra. And
David Willbrand: why do that when it's so easy to amend it on a point in time basis. But there's a bigger reason. And the bigger reason is, you just don't know
David Willbrand: what the rights and privileges and terms and restrictions of that future preferred stock is at this point. In time. You probably know the common.
David Willbrand: You know you're you're, I would imagine, as a founder. You're gonna have common stock that votes. Maybe it has super voting. Maybe it just has regular voting, but it's probably voting common stock of one kind or another. You might. You don't have to. But you might have also authorized non voting common for employees.
David Willbrand: Don't have to. Many companies, don't. It? Tends not to make that much difference, truly. When push comes to shove. I've never seen it impact an outcome. But Picasso has non voting common. You know. My founders wanted to do it, which is fine. So all the employees, including me, hold on voting common that would be set up in the charter. So you know that
David Willbrand: you've got your preferred, your your founder stock. You've got your non voting employee common stock, but when it comes to the preferred you have no idea
David Willbrand: what the rights and privileges of the series A are going to be, or the B or the C, or if there are sub classes or sub series inside that. Maybe you're gonna have an a 1 and a 2 and an a 3. There's just so much that's unknown. What you just get into this rhythm of you, you will just modify and amend the certificate of incorporation, to reflect the terms of each deal as you negotiate it, and as you implement it over time?
David Willbrand: These are good questions. Anything else. Before we we bounce into common versus preferred.
George H: Looks like we're good.
David Willbrand: Alright
David Willbrand: super.
David Willbrand: So
David Willbrand: we've already teased this.
David Willbrand: There are
David Willbrand: 2 primary classes
David Willbrand: of stock.
David Willbrand: There's common stock, and there's preferred stock.
David Willbrand: As a general matter. Anyone who is getting shares of stock for services
David Willbrand: is getting common stock.
David Willbrand: It's founders, employees, executives, contractors, consultants, advisors, directors, etc, etc, etc. If you are performing services
David Willbrand: and you're getting stock for those services or down the road, you're getting stock options
David Willbrand: that are exercisable for stock.
David Willbrand: 999 million times out of a billion. It's gonna be common.
David Willbrand: are there exceptions where it's preferred? Sure. But those are hyper, unusual. And you better have a really good rationale for it, because it'll look a little weird on your cap table, and you'll you'll have investors that will will sort of demand support for that. So the pocket
David Willbrand: is common for services which, of course, means preferred for money.
David Willbrand: Now, sometimes
David Willbrand: people will
David Willbrand: get common for money, but that's increasingly unusual basically coming out of the sixties and the seventies venture capital funds invented this special type of preferred stock. And we're going to talk about it in a moment. They designed it so that it's particularly well suited for as an investment instrument into startup companies.
David Willbrand: Venture capitalists always ask for preferred stock, and they ask for preferred stock with a certain kind of configuration and constitution which we'll chat about shortly.
David Willbrand: I started practicing in 1996,
David Willbrand: in 1,996. There were certainly times where angel investors or other investors might be willing to take common stock for their investment.
David Willbrand: You still occasionally see that.
David Willbrand: But I would say that you know information flows at the speed of the Internet, which is fast, and even even your run of the mill angel, investor and early stage investor at this point knows or has heard of preferred stock, and they might not know why they want it, but they just know that they do, because that's what the Vcs get. So that's what they want to get.
David Willbrand: So that's the way that it sorts. So this is generally how it works. Common stock for services preferred stock for money. Now, before we get into the distinctions, and the distinctions are there, which is why Vcs. And now angels want it. It's important to not lose the forest for the trees, because we're about to get into some trees, and we're gonna get into some leaves and some branches on those trees. But let's 1st start with the forest. And this is the really key point
David Willbrand: one
David Willbrand: to one.
David Willbrand: These
David Willbrand: at a very basic level.
David Willbrand: These shares
David Willbrand: are interchangeable
David Willbrand: on a 1 to one basis economically, and that matters
David Willbrand: when you're looking at our cap table
David Willbrand: because our net proceeds, and I will talk about. You know the nuance here. We'll get into it in a moment. But just the default rule. And I want you to understand this because this is powerful, and it's super important, because founders tend to focus
David Willbrand: understandably and appropriately so on the nuances. But and they and it can, you can get really uptight about it.
David Willbrand: but try to take 2 steps back and focus on on the forest. And it's this.
David Willbrand: if this is founder A, and this is Founder B,
David Willbrand: and this was our employee number one. But let's say, this was a Vc.
David Willbrand: okay.
David Willbrand: so we've got 3 million common.
David Willbrand: 3 million common
David Willbrand: 1 million common, because that's for services.
David Willbrand: And then we have 3 million preferred.
David Willbrand: because that's what our Vc. Bought.
David Willbrand: It's still all rolled up into the same column shares.
David Willbrand: and it's rolled up into the same column
David Willbrand: from which we derive ownership percentages.
David Willbrand: So this Vc is not getting
David Willbrand: something extra there. Okay, 30, 30, 10,
David Willbrand: one to one
David Willbrand: that's massively important.
David Willbrand: massively important.
David Willbrand: We tweak it on the edges. We talk about that in a second, but don't lose sight of this one to 1 point. I I think you would be shocked at how many founders who have even gone through the process before, don't fully appreciate or understand this point? Because, like I said, we tend to focus on the nuance and not this core substantive issue. But it's super important to keep in mind
David Willbrand: if nothing else, just for the sake of your mental health, so that you don't feel like you're quote unquote, you know, losing control of the economics of your company as you go out to raise. Now
David Willbrand: I promise nuance, I said. Nuance there must be nuance, because otherwise
David Willbrand: venture capitalist would just buy common stock. Right? So let's let's talk about what that nuance is
David Willbrand: tends to fall into 2 categories
David Willbrand: control
David Willbrand: for governance.
David Willbrand: It's category one
David Willbrand: and then economics, of course
David Willbrand: would be category 2
David Willbrand: start with control governance.
David Willbrand: You look back at our Cap table
David Willbrand: ownership percentages
David Willbrand: most people know as a default rule
David Willbrand: under Delaware general corporation law and the State laws of other states. You know, all of the things being equal.
David Willbrand: If you've got 51%
David Willbrand: ownership.
David Willbrand: you run the show. Okay, these are majority rules by share counts.
David Willbrand: And for a very long time
David Willbrand: founders
David Willbrand: will have an excess
David Willbrand: of 51%.
David Willbrand: Okay, late in the game. When you're getting out into your series, E series C and series D,
David Willbrand: the founder group is probably falling below 50% because the rest is being eaten up and consumed and sold to investors. It's not a bad thing, I mean, you know, you don't get to a billion dollar valuation simply because people think you're cool? You know, you need to raise capital to build business. And the way you do that is by selling stock.
David Willbrand: So at some point you're gonna fall below that level. But you're gonna stick at 51% for a long time. And above.
David Willbrand: and Vcs are aware of this.
David Willbrand: Now, Vcs tend to take minority interests, and they want. If you look at. You know Peter Walker's Carta data, and Peter Walker, by the way, is a great follow on Linkedin. He's a friend. So I'm a little bit biased, but he's great because they carter has all of that, and
David Willbrand: an anonymized. Let me say it right? Data, from the companies that use carta, and he's able to provide, you know, really grounded information, and he shares it on Linkedin. As a general matter, you know, looking at preceding seed altogether.
David Willbrand: you know, the state of the of the market right now is just only about 20% of the company
David Willbrand: series a tends to be. You're selling. About 20% of the company tends to be around where it sits
David Willbrand: now
David Willbrand: focusing in particular on Rvcs.
David Willbrand: They know that all of the things being equal, they're gonna have no say
David Willbrand: as stockholders. They're generally okay with that, you know they're not. They're not looking to come in and be super active investors, you know, despite what people may say, and sometimes Vcs do earn the negative news.
David Willbrand: In my experience. The vast, vast, vast, vast, vast majority of venture capitalists are super helpful, very passive, and they just participate and lean in when asked, and or when they
David Willbrand: see something that is hyper concerning, and they raise it respectfully and work with the founders through it. So Vcs are, are you need to know what you're doing, and you need to keep an eye on things and do your homework do research. But they're not to be feared. At least as a default rule. So I would. I would say, that is an important part to keep in mind, too. Now
David Willbrand: that being said, they're investing for a reason, and it's not just to subsidize your hopes and dreams. They want to make money from this, so
David Willbrand: they will also believe that, as a consequence, given. The size of their investment may not be 51%, but 20% is a pretty good chunk
David Willbrand: that they ought to have a voice
David Willbrand: on matters that are economically relevant
David Willbrand: in a highly material way to the company.
David Willbrand: So what might those be? Those would be things like
David Willbrand: sales of shares.
David Willbrand: Those would be things like
David Willbrand: distributions of cash.
David Willbrand: Those would be things like sale, the company.
David Willbrand: these fall in a part of the certificate of incorporation that are called protective provisions.
David Willbrand: That's the that's the framing that they're given.
David Willbrand: Sometimes they're referred to as veto rights. You're never gonna see that in the certificate of incorporation they will be referred to as protective provisions, but they function like a veto right? Which is why they're expressed that way. Why, people would might say that. And there are 5, 6, or 7 that are pretty typical and tend to fall into these sorts of categories. Sometimes Vcs ask for a lot more than that, because they want to have a lot more. Say.
David Willbrand: I don't think that's I wouldn't necessarily say that's a red flag, but I would say it's a conversation you should have with them, and say why, and your attorney should be able to direct you as to the ones that may be off market in terms of what's being asked. Now, how do they operate like veto rights.
David Willbrand: these pursuant to these protective provisions, they can't make you
David Willbrand: sell shares.
David Willbrand: They can't make you distribute cash, and they can't make you sell the company, but what they can do is they can stop you from doing it.
David Willbrand: So if management wants to sell shares.
David Willbrand: and the Board wants to sell shares.
David Willbrand: and
David Willbrand: 51% of the outstanding shares vote to sell shares.
David Willbrand: If the Vcs don't want to.
David Willbrand: They can exercise their veto right, and say no
David Willbrand: same with distribution of cash. Same with sale of the company. Now that sounds scary.
David Willbrand: totally. Get it.
David Willbrand: I would say that in 25 years of doing this work
David Willbrand: there aren't a lot of things that I can say I've never seen about. I've seen a lot of things. Some good, some bad. But I have never seen, never.
David Willbrand: Cdbc exercise
David Willbrand: their veto right in a classic on the record kind of way.
David Willbrand: So
David Willbrand: the reaction to that might be. Well, then, why do they need it?
David Willbrand: If it's never exercised? If it's never used, they should just drop it. And let's just not have this hanging out there as this kind of scary shadow inside the stripping Corporation fair point.
David Willbrand: But what a Vc. Would say! And I would say, this is a good argument
David Willbrand: is that that's actually what they're there to do. They are not there to be literally used. They do not want
David Willbrand: to stop the growth or get in the way of what management and the board and the majority shareholders want to do just arbitrarily.
David Willbrand: just as an exercise of power. That's not their game.
David Willbrand: What this does, though the fact that it exists is it forces a conversation.
David Willbrand: It means, you know, that if you want to sell the company, or if you want to distribute cash, or if you want to sell shares of stock.
David Willbrand: you know that you're going to need to get their approval
David Willbrand: because you don't want them to exercise a veto. Right?
David Willbrand: So you're gonna have to go to them early in the process and say.
David Willbrand: here's what we want to do. Here's what we're going to use the money for, and these are the sorts of shares that we want to sell. And this is how we're going to sell them.
David Willbrand: Here's the cash we want to distribute. Here's why. Here's the sale of the company that we think is coming. We want to bring you in into the tent early. So you know what we're up to, and so that you're aligned.
David Willbrand: that's all they want. They want to make sure that they're not being surprised. They want to make sure that they're part of the conversation. They want to make sure they have the chance to be heard. What they don't want to do is they don't want to arbitrarily destroy value that's in nobody's interest, theirs most importantly.
David Willbrand: So. 1st and foremost.
David Willbrand: that's what the preferred stock gives them. It gives them these protective provisions, this opportunity to participate, notwithstanding the fact that they hold a minority interest in the company. I also don't want you to feel like I'm just here as an apologist for venture capitalists. You know, 70% of my clients are startups. I work in a startup. I'm certainly, you know, extremely founder, leaning. I'm an eir with tech stars, I mean, I'm all about the founders, but and I'm
David Willbrand: certainly happy to call Vcs out on their bullshit when I see it. But this is a place that I would say is
David Willbrand: is a place that you should not feel
David Willbrand: threatened or scared when you see protected provisions. It's a part of these transactions. It's part of the relationship. It's understood. The one thing to keep an eye on is, as I mentioned is, if you see that list grow from 5 or 6 or 7, and it's like 15 or 16 items that's definitely worth a conversation, because that would be off market.
David Willbrand: So before I slide into economics.
David Willbrand: happy to take some questions on these on this matter of of protected provisions. If anybody has one.
George H: Thank you very much. So what other items, I guess, would be on that list and other things like.
George H: I guess other major chain user. They just want to be aware of, or you know, what else should we typically see if it's not off market.
David Willbrand: Yup. So you you could see things like
David Willbrand: if you change
David Willbrand: the line of business.
David Willbrand: Okay? So they invest in you because you're an AI company. And then you decide that you're sick of this AI stuff, and what you've always wanted to do is you wanted to be a 3rd party distributor for Girl Scout cookies. And you're gonna change your business model to reflect that a Vc. Might say we think we should have a say in that conversation that might be a provision that they would add, I would say, it's not market, but you sometimes see it, and that's the reason why
David Willbrand: drilling down even further.
David Willbrand: They might say things like any pay increase
David Willbrand: for the executive team. They want to have a say on it
David Willbrand: that starts to feel a little less reasonable. There's there's a sense of. Now you're moving from. I understand you're concerned about cash.
David Willbrand: and I understand you. You want to make sure that we're keeping our eye on that ball. But, on the other hand, that feels like an operating decision
David Willbrand: that does not feel like it's that highly material sort of decision that that should raise up to the level of a stockholder conversation in the stockholder vote.
David Willbrand: Moving the offices of the company entering into a lease for office space. Entering into contracts
David Willbrand: above a certain size. And you know, if you are a compute heavy company
David Willbrand: that could be a big part of your budget.
David Willbrand: And they may say, Look, we just wanna make sure that you don't get out over your skis.
David Willbrand: Maybe in that context it's okay.
David Willbrand: On the other hand, maybe it starts to look like meddling. So those are the sorts of issues that that you're thinking about, you know. Where does it go from.
David Willbrand: You know the company distributing a lot of cash to the stockholders through a dividend or otherwise, or the company selling, which, of course, is highly material, or the company raising money through the sale of stock which is going to dilute
David Willbrand: the venture capitalists for the reasons we just described, adding more shares to the cap table. Those are all reasonable things for them to have a have a point of view on and to be consulted about, but these these below the line. Operating decisions can sometimes seem to be a little bit much.
George H: Thank you for that. And what about? In terms of
George H: I guess getting into the weeds where they want to review the business plan or budgets and budgets for the year ahead.
George H: But also, I guess when you're doing a future fundraising round, do they have
George H: the ability to?
George H: I guess, particularly if it's a down ground. How how do they essentially provision for that? And is it captured within the means? Within the certificate of in collaboration.
David Willbrand: So
David Willbrand: they
David Willbrand: they're very concerned about
David Willbrand: the cap table because it goes to
David Willbrand: their percentage of the company and what they're going to want to walk away with when you sell, so they're very sensitive to that. Which is why it's a protective provision
David Willbrand: but they also understand that companies need to raise money to grow. So you know, series a investors are not gonna sort of arbitrarily pump the brakes on a series B, they'll be thrilled that you're having a series. B and in fact, you know what I find is, forget the protective provisions. You know. The best founders stay in constant communication
David Willbrand: with their investors simply because their investors are an incredible resource. Their investors might participate. So they might, you know, a series. A investor might reinvest series. B, sometimes that happens. What most certainly will happen is a good series. A investor will have references.
David Willbrand: you know, funds that they've worked with who operated the series B level, who they'd like to see in this company, and they would help connect you to. They're gonna certainly be more inclined to do that if they are fond of you, and feel connected to this company and respected. So you know, that's reason, too. So these are soft reasons. Now there are additional provisions which you alluded to. In your in your comments.
David Willbrand: One R. Let me just
David Willbrand: jot through these pretty briefly, very typically, you'll see
David Willbrand: they're sometimes called preemptive rights. That's kind of the classic technical, legal word. Sometimes they're called pro rata rights.
David Willbrand: Sometimes they're called
David Willbrand: participation rights. Confusingly.
David Willbrand: for reasons we'll discover in a second. Sometimes they're called rights of 1st refusal, also confusingly. So, you know, hopefully, they're more clear when they're called preemptive or pro rata. It's they have these other titles. Then you just need a little. Read a little bit further to make sure that they're not referring to something else.
David Willbrand: What happens here is, let's say, with our example, we have a Vc who holds 3 million shares, and they own 30% of the company.
David Willbrand: What this right will give them is the right to participate in the next financing to buy shares. They don't get them for free. They have to write a check.
David Willbrand: It's not. It's not a special deal.
David Willbrand: It just ensures that they have an opportunity to do it. They can buy more shares
David Willbrand: to ensure that they stay at 30%,
David Willbrand: because if they don't. You know, if if there are 30% with their 3 million shares and someone comes along and we now add 5 million new shares to the cap table.
David Willbrand: This is gonna drop. Maybe they're okay with that.
David Willbrand: Maybe they're okay with it dropping.
David Willbrand: They're like we knew it. Would. You know, founders get diluted employees get diluted series. A investors get diluted. It's the way of the world. But if they want to maintain, for whatever reason, that 30% number, and many Vcs do like to lock in to a certain ownership percentage the preemptive rights ensure. They have the right to do that now. It may seem unnecessary like, why do they need to have preemptive rights if they want to buy more stock in the series? B. Financing, of course we'll let them. Well, it doesn't always work that way sometimes what happens is.
David Willbrand: if you're doing a series. B, and let's say you want to raise 20 million dollars and let's take. Let's say you're talking to. I don't know any. A. And they say we want to do the whole 20 million dollars.
David Willbrand: Well, you know, without preemptive rights. You could just proceed full speed ahead
David Willbrand: and
David Willbrand: the series a investors could get iced out. This is a way of ensuring. They have an opportunity
David Willbrand: to participate inside of that 20 million dollar syndicate. Now, sometimes these get horse traded.
David Willbrand: you know. Maybe their preemptive rights would have given them the right to buy 4 million dollars worth.
David Willbrand: and Nea says I don't want to buy 16 million dollars. I need to get at least 18.
David Willbrand: Maybe our Vc. Would say fine, I'll drop down to 2. I just want to have the chance to buy a little. I want to buy some
David Willbrand: that happens all the time.
David Willbrand: and so it's a negotiation. But it's only a negotiation because they have preemptive rights. And because everybody's forced to deal with them. So that's what preemptive rights do or pro rata rights do. That's what they're there for.
David Willbrand: It's to help give them a chance to protect their ownership percentage on the cap table.
David Willbrand: The other thing you mentioned was a down round
David Willbrand: a down round means this.
David Willbrand: you sold series A
David Willbrand: at a dollar a share.
David Willbrand: and you sold series B
David Willbrand: at a dollar 50 a share, and you sold series C
David Willbrand: at 2 50 a share.
David Willbrand: But now you're gonna do Series D,
David Willbrand: and you're gonna do it at
David Willbrand: 1 25 a share.
David Willbrand: This has happened a lot in the last year and a half.
David Willbrand: because these frowns were raised
David Willbrand: pre. 2022.
David Willbrand: And these late stage companies are stuck
David Willbrand: because valuations have been adjusted and they can't support those numbers anymore. But they need to raise capital, and they go out and they raise a series D
David Willbrand: at a dollar 25. That is not a down round. As to the series, a dollar 25 is more than a dollar. So what I'm about to talk about with adjustment rates doesn't count.
David Willbrand: It is a down round. As to the series B. And it is a down round. As to the series C.
David Willbrand: Now there are 2 types
David Willbrand: of
David Willbrand: protective rights
David Willbrand: that would apply in this case.
David Willbrand: The 1st
David Willbrand: is called a full ratchet.
David Willbrand: and it is one of the most delicious phrases
David Willbrand: in all of the law, because it's super descriptive.
David Willbrand: and it is exactly what it says, because it is a full ratchet, and it is ratchet. It is not nice, and it is not kind, and it's not gentle.
David Willbrand: A full ratchet means that your series B and your series. C. Will not suffer
David Willbrand: any sort of dilution from a economic perspective, as it relates to this relates to this dollar 25. Now, the math
David Willbrand: to get into. This is beyond the time that we have, but the Tldr. Is that
David Willbrand: their ownership will be adjusted, such that it would be as if they invested at a dollar 25,
David Willbrand: and as if they invested at a dollar 25
David Willbrand: rather than at a dollar 50 and 2 50, and otherwise the price for them. They suffer no economic dilution from the financing. They will functionally, not literally, but functionally, get more shares
David Willbrand: to account for that, that they don't have to pay for so unlike preemptive rights, where they do have to pay with this down round protection, they don't have to full ratchet, extremely rare. If full ratchet shows up in a term sheet that is definitely a place to say, we we gotta have a conversation. I need to understand why. That is not a market term. Instead, the much less delicious
David Willbrand: and the much less descriptive, but the kinder and the gentler type. And I'm not even gonna write. It is weighted average anti dilution protection. That is mouthful.
David Willbrand: What it basically means is is we're going to provide a bit of a tweak
David Willbrand: to give them some adjustment to soften the blow.
David Willbrand: But it's not going to be this aggressive
David Willbrand: depending upon how deep
David Willbrand: the down round is and how much money we raise.
David Willbrand: This is why the average is weighted, and this is where the math comes in. It's pretty advanced. But you can find some good materials that describe it. If you're if you're curious.
David Willbrand: we'll adjust this a little bit so you wouldn't see in a traditional case
David Willbrand: the dollar 50 go to a dollar 25, it probably would go to some effective price of like a dollar, 47.
David Willbrand: And this might go from 2, 50 to 2, 32, or something. So there's definitely a benefit
David Willbrand: to these stockholders. But it's just not as as deep and as aggressive.
David Willbrand: All this being said.
David Willbrand: I would, I would say to you this
David Willbrand: 90% of the time plus
David Willbrand: these rights are waived.
David Willbrand: So even though the series B and the series C
David Willbrand: could take advantage
David Willbrand: of these anti dilution rights to get a bit of an economic boost. They wave it.
David Willbrand: and they just stick with their dollar 50, and they stick with their 2 50.
David Willbrand: Now do they do that out of the kindness of their heart? No.
David Willbrand: the reason that they do it
David Willbrand: is goes back to psychology and optics. We talked at the beginning about that, with share numbers
David Willbrand: and psychology and optics matter to startup companies. And this is another place that they matter. If you have a down round.
David Willbrand: down round is already tough enough from an optics perspective, because it suggests that the momentum has broken a bit. So the company is already going to have to fight
David Willbrand: to get its upward trajectory back.
David Willbrand: If you insert onto the cap table these sorts of adjustments. It's just a bad hook.
David Willbrand: and it looks a little rapacious, and so, even though you have, you had the right to it, you negotiated it. It wasn't like something you you squeezed out late in the game. Everybody understood that it was there. But, it can be something that can leave a bad taste in people's mouth, and it can also make the cap table extremely complicated and just hard to manage and hard to work with. But the biggest reason.
David Willbrand: I would say that's the sub tier reason. The biggest reason is this person the series D investor.
David Willbrand: And the reason for that is is the series D investor
David Willbrand: cares about 2 people.
David Willbrand: The series. E investor cares about itself
David Willbrand: and the series. The investor cares about the founders.
David Willbrand: The series, D investor does not care about series A series B series C,
David Willbrand: they're gonna say, the right stuff. And they're gonna pretend they do. But they don't.
David Willbrand: And they know
David Willbrand: that a hundred percent is a 0 sum game.
David Willbrand: And they want to help you. They want to cut the best deal they can for themselves.
David Willbrand: but they certainly want to make sure that the founders remain fully engaged and fully compensated and fully incentivized because it's the founders that are going to create the value
David Willbrand: for the series D, and if they think that these adjustments are going to get in the way of that. They're going to say we're coming in at 1 25. But guess what we're not doing this deal.
David Willbrand: Unless this gets waived.
David Willbrand: and the series B and the series C. Will usually rely on.
David Willbrand: They might bark a little bit. They might hand ring a little bit, but they're probably not surprised because they've, you know, seen this movie before. They understand the reason for the ask, and they'll let it go. It's a force for the tree situation again. Yes, they would like to have it on a short term basis, but if giving it up means that the company gets funded
David Willbrand: and has a chance to see another day and perhaps get back to an ultimate value on an exit perspective that's above 2 50, and everybody's happy, then
David Willbrand: they'll let it go.
David Willbrand: So that's how a downround works.
David Willbrand: And this is this is one of the areas
David Willbrand: that does have an economic impact. We talked about one to one.
David Willbrand: Obviously, comma doesn't get this. So this is a right that if triggered and it's only triggered in the down round
David Willbrand: only if the price per share is lower.
David Willbrand: if it gets triggered, it can impact
David Willbrand: that economic equation. But it tends not to be radical.
David Willbrand: It's not going to be like one to 2, or one to 3, be like one to 1.1 or something, but still that means something, but it's pretty rare. That it's triggered, and it's even more rare that people actually take advantage of it.
David Willbrand: But let's let's talk now about the economic rates that are important
David Willbrand: because they. They do apply in a more transcendent way.
David Willbrand: and there's a little jargon.
David Willbrand: and I try to avoid too much jargon. But this is important, because this is just the way we speak about this. So there are 2 types of preferred stock there is participating.
David Willbrand: preferred.
David Willbrand: and there is non participating, preferred.
David Willbrand: And the way that you can tell. The difference is by the conjunction that shows up
David Willbrand: when we're talking about the economic right here. Participating preferred
David Willbrand: is and
David Willbrand: nonparticipating preferred is war.
David Willbrand: Okay? So what context are we talking about
David Willbrand: these distinctions? Matter
David Willbrand: participating versus not participating when we're talking about the liquidation of the company.
David Willbrand: Now.
David Willbrand: when people hear the word liquidation
David Willbrand: most of the time. What they think of is some kid standing out on a corner with, you know, a placard on the front and a placard on the back.
David Willbrand: You know, this electronic store is going out of business. Everything must go 80% off liquidation sale.
David Willbrand: That is a liquidation, and that's a bad liquidation.
David Willbrand: But there's also a good liquidation.
David Willbrand: and the good liquidation is this.
David Willbrand: let's go back to our initial example.
David Willbrand: We sold this company
David Willbrand: for gross proceeds in excess of a billion dollars
David Willbrand: a billion dollars to liquidation. We paid off the liabilities
David Willbrand: that took us to a billion dollars even in net proceeds. That was the example they were playing with here. Okay.
David Willbrand: now.
David Willbrand: all of us on the cab table
David Willbrand: who have a claim to equity, who have a claim to these net proceeds. Want to get our share. You know. We want to get our 300 million 100 million, whatever it is.
David Willbrand: Well, how do we do that?
David Willbrand: Well, the way that we do it is by liquidating the company.
David Willbrand: by breaking that egg shell
David Willbrand: and releasing the yolk
David Willbrand: of the net proceeds. That's how we get them into the hands. I don't know if you want to get yolk in your hands. That's a terrible. My metaphor game is really kind of disgusting today I apologize. But that's how you get the net proceeds out of the company. It's a liquidation.
David Willbrand: but it's obviously very different than a going out of business sale. So given that we said
David Willbrand: that some startup companies will go public, but the vast vast vast majority will sell in a trade sale
David Willbrand: through an M. And a event mergers and acquisitions.
David Willbrand: Then, if we said that, and that's what we're working toward, and that's the light at the end of the tunnel. That's the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. That is a liquidation. So when you get a term sheet.
David Willbrand: and there's a section entitled Liquidation Pay attention. It's the most important part of the term sheet. You certainly want to read those protective provisions
David Willbrand: you want to see if they're being obnoxious, or if they're, you know, staying within the 4 corners of what's market appropriate but liquidation rights huge
David Willbrand: because it goes to the core economics of what's happening, what's happening in the end game.
David Willbrand: So this is why this is why participation matters or non participation matters, because it shows up on liquidation and liquidation is what we're working for. Now.
David Willbrand: before we really start to explicate
David Willbrand: and tease these concepts apart, there's another piece of jargon that we need to become aware of, and that is the liquidation
David Willbrand: preference.
David Willbrand: The liquidation preference is expressed as a multiple of the purchase price
David Willbrand: market
David Willbrand: is one times
David Willbrand: the purchase price.
David Willbrand: So
David Willbrand: in this prior example.
David Willbrand: if it's market, the liquidation preference for the series, A
David Willbrand: is a dollar.
David Willbrand: The liquidation preference for the series, B is a dollar 50. The liquidation preference for the series C is 2 50. The liquidation preference for the series d. Is a dollar 25. It's 1 times. The purchase price.
David Willbrand: The way it will read in your certificate of incorporation is one times, and then it'll say, like one x, and it will use a phrase called original issue price, which is just a fancy way of saying purchase price.
David Willbrand: Okay. The original issue price. The price at which the stock was originally issued was originally sold, was originally purchased. So this
David Willbrand: is extremely market.
David Willbrand: If you get a term sheet that has something different than this, it's extraordinarily rarely less than that. That would be good for you
David Willbrand: if it were less than one X. But I have actually never seen that Peter Walker Carter tells me it. It does exist in the wild, but it is extraordinarily rare.
David Willbrand: It is a proverbial black swan.
David Willbrand: but you sometimes see, multiples above that, and that is definitely investor favorable, which will then we'll tell. Talk about the reason here shortly.
David Willbrand: If you do see
David Willbrand: a liquidation. Preference is expressed as 1.5 X or 2 x or 3 X. That's a big deal.
David Willbrand: That is a red flag.
David Willbrand: cause that is way off market, particularly at the early stage. That's a conversation that you need to have with the lawyer, and that's a conversation you need to have with the investor. It'll be really important to understand why they may have a good reason for it, but they owe you
David Willbrand: a lengthy and substantive conversation and explanation.
David Willbrand: or they just may be bad people, in which case this is how you know, and you may want to think about walking away.
David Willbrand: So why does this matter?
David Willbrand: Let's start with nonparticipating preferred
David Willbrand: the way that nonparticipating preferred works is, it says in liquidation.
David Willbrand: you get the greater of
David Willbrand: your percentage of proceeds
David Willbrand: based on ownership
David Willbrand: or
David Willbrand: your liquidation preference. So if you paid a dollar share
David Willbrand: and
David Willbrand: based upon your percentage of the net proceeds.
David Willbrand: you would stand to get $2 a share
David Willbrand: for $3 a share
David Willbrand: or a dollar one per share.
David Willbrand: You're going to go with this.
David Willbrand: And, by the way, if you're working in this box, and you're getting a percentage of the proceeds based upon your ownership percentage. That's exactly how common is playing.
David Willbrand: So in this context, there is 0 advantage.
David Willbrand: the holding preferred stock. It is literally common stock for economic purposes. It is literally one to one. Okay, so great outcome. Very good result. Hopefully, this is even more than that. Hopefully, it's 4 or 5, or 6, or 7, or whatever.
David Willbrand: This is a good day.
David Willbrand: If, however, their liquidation preference with which, if it's 1 x is just a dollar.
David Willbrand: if that's better.
David Willbrand: What that means is their percentage of proceeds would get them 50 cents
David Willbrand: or 20 cents or 80 cents.
David Willbrand: That means they paid a buck for something that's now giving them 80 cents. That's bad. Okay, that's a bad outcome.
David Willbrand: And that's what this is here for. This is intended to be a bit of a safety valve. It does impact
David Willbrand: our one to one exchange.
David Willbrand: because this is an economic benefit to them, because it guarantees them their purchase price back.
David Willbrand: which means you would be getting a little bit less as the founder. So our one to one is impacted. But it only happens in a bad liquidation scenario.
David Willbrand: Okay, this is why this is sometimes called Downside protection
David Willbrand: on the upside.
David Willbrand: They're gonna participate with you side by side. Hunky dory.
David Willbrand: This liquidation, right will only be triggered, only be triggered in a downside scenario.
David Willbrand: But this is why you can also see why the one X is relevant. If it were 2 X.
David Willbrand: Then the liquidation preference wouldn't be a dollar. It'd be $2,
David Willbrand: and if they were to pull, say, a hundred and say a dollar 50,
David Willbrand: which
David Willbrand: is more than they paid.
David Willbrand: but
David Willbrand: $2 is more.
David Willbrand: They'll play here. So this is where the economics can start to get a little bit filled with, and where the justification can start to fall away a little bit, too. It's 1 thing to say I'm guaranteed to get my money back.
David Willbrand: There's some intuitive logic to it.
David Willbrand: But to say that I should be getting extra juice in the downside scenario that becomes a little bit harder to swallow, and that that becomes the necessity of the conversation. The good news is is that the early stage, this one X thing
David Willbrand: is like 99% of the time, and the carbon data supports that. It's it's extremely rare that people deviate from that. So when you get your 1st term sheet, that's a priced round for preferred stock, it should say one X.
David Willbrand: It should also be non participating
David Willbrand: 99, 9, 9% of the deals non participating. That's really good. So if you have a pre seed price, or a C price or series a
David Willbrand: series. B.
David Willbrand: It would be shocking if you got something different than one X nonparticipating preferred, and that's good.
David Willbrand: That means that one to one ratio is holding, and it's only going to change in a bad liquidation. Bad at bad outcome scenario.
David Willbrand: But
David Willbrand: we keep talking about this other alternative. So let's describe what it is
David Willbrand: participating preferred.
David Willbrand: It's and
David Willbrand: which means they get both.
David Willbrand: They get their money back.
David Willbrand: I should actually
David Willbrand: shouldn't say that maybe more precise. They get their liquidation preference
David Willbrand: and
David Willbrand: they get their ownership percentage.
David Willbrand: So if it's 1 x.
David Willbrand: and they paid a dollar
David Willbrand: from the net proceeds. The 1st thing you have to do is pay them and give them a dollar a share.
David Willbrand: and then whatever's left on a net net basis.
David Willbrand: they get their percentage of that. So remember our equation. That was
David Willbrand: assets minus liabilities equals equity. What's really happening here is assets minus liabilities minus liquidation. Preference equals equity.
David Willbrand: and they get this.
David Willbrand: And then they also get their percentage of this.
David Willbrand: which is why participating preferred is oftentimes called double dipping.
David Willbrand: And it's not because they really like ice cream.
David Willbrand: It's because they really like money.
David Willbrand: And
David Willbrand: they get to go twice.
David Willbrand: When I started 1996, half the deals
David Willbrand: we're participating prefer no joke.
David Willbrand: 50, 50, especially Eastern Mississippi. But even in California, you know, 50% of the deals we're participating preferred. The really good news is is the market has moved away from that over the last 25 years. The decision has just been made that it just creates too much disalignment.
David Willbrand: and friction between investors and founders alike. And we don't like that. We want there to be better alignment. We want economic incentives
David Willbrand: to be more tightly associated and correlated, so participating, preferred has fallen by the wayside. That being said particularly in hard times like these.
David Willbrand: our series d. Remember, we were showing that it might be a down round.
David Willbrand: Don't be shocked if it also is participating, preferred, and don't be shocked if it's like a 2 x kind of situation.
David Willbrand: because in tough times, in later rounds
David Willbrand: it does show up sometimes, and sometimes it shows up for wrong reasons, and it's rapacious.
David Willbrand: But sometimes at the later stage, it actually shows up in good faith. I was just on a podcast, with, with Peter, with Carta. And I was talking about scenarios where it is a good faith. Ask
David Willbrand: by later stage investors, and and it can happen when they're trying to help you protect valuation and keep the valuation of the company up. Maybe not make it a down round, but they need a little bit more economics, just because, you know, the company has in theory dropped. It's not worth what it was. And you know, one way to get more economics is by lowering the valuation, and they get more of the company for their investment.
David Willbrand: Another way to do better with economics is through participation rights and fiddling with liquidation preference. So sometimes the ask comes from a proper place. But oftentimes it doesn't. That's why it needs to be. That's why the conversation needs to take place. Now. We don't have a lot of time left.
David Willbrand: I do think it's really important to get to this key point
David Willbrand: safes
David Willbrand: and notes. This obviously could warn a lot longer conversation for whatever it's worth I wrote a book called See Deals. I'm not here to try to
David Willbrand: push it. I make very little money from it. I didn't do it for that I did. It is just to make it a resource for founders. You can find it on Amazon. It's about 175 pages long. I talk a lot about all this stuff and really get into save some notes in more detail. So that would be a resource. And then there are obviously lots of resources on the Internet that are really good, too, including chat Gpt. So this is certainly not a commercial for me, but it's there if you want it
David Willbrand: with safes and notes, the idea can be
David Willbrand: we don't want to go through all the hassle
David Willbrand: of putting a new strip of stock in place. We don't want to amend the certificate. We don't want to negotiate terms. We don't want to authorize more shares. We don't want to fight about all the little piddly rights that that could be implicated and could be involved, particularly at the pre seed and the seed stage.
David Willbrand: We just want to get there fast. We don't want to spend a lot of money on lawyers. We don't want to fight over extraneous deal terms. Let's just get something in place originally. What we created for that were notes
David Willbrand: and notes would have principal. That's the investment amount.
David Willbrand: They would have an interest rate, because a note is debt until it converts to equity. It's debt. It's a liability on our balance sheet. It has to have interest.
David Willbrand: because the Irs says that's a feature of debt.
David Willbrand: Oftentimes the interest rate is like 6 to 10% depending on markets like, now, it's more like 9 or 10% during bull markets. It's more like 5 or 6,
David Willbrand: and it has to have a maturity date when it comes due. This also is required because it's debt. So this is gonna be XY, you know, 2026, or something. And they work really well, really quick, really easy. And then you might talk about you know what are the conversion features? When does a note convert into equity? Well, you'd raise around of a certain size, call it a qualified financing.
David Willbrand: and maybe it's got a discount. Which means that if your series a investor buys at a dollar and there's a 20% discount, you get to invest at 80 cents. So you get a little bit more for your money, or maybe there's a cap
David Willbrand: which asked, is valuation. So your series a invests at a valuation of 10 million.
David Willbrand: but your cap
David Willbrand: was 5 million, so you don't invest at 10 million. Your note converts at 5 million. So you just get more bang for your buck there those provisions would apply as well, and that's how notes were structured. But then, in 2,013 Yc. Came along and said, how about we do this safe, simple agreement for future equity?
David Willbrand: And what we're gonna do is
David Willbrand: we're gonna get rid of interest because no one really values it. And it's a pain to kind of calculate. There's just a lot of overhead associated with it. And we're gonna get rid of the maturity date because that's stressful for everybody. So we'll include the conversion terms. Is there a cap? Is there a discount? Obviously there's an investment amount?
David Willbrand: And then that's what goes into a safe
David Willbrand: now safe
David Willbrand: is consequently not debt.
David Willbrand: because it doesn't have an interest rate, and it doesn't have maturity date. So notes live up here
David Willbrand: in our liability box, where to safe? Well, there's only one other option. They have to live down here, and they do.
David Willbrand: They live in equity.
David Willbrand: And the question is, what are they? Are they stock.
David Willbrand: or are they a type of option?
David Willbrand: And that is still an unknown
David Willbrand: Y combinator? And they're
David Willbrand: supporters would say that it is literally stock.
David Willbrand: and there are certain advantages under
David Willbrand: 12 0, 2 qualified small business stock provisions that would associate with that
David Willbrand: other practitioners like me. Suggest. They're not that they're options, that they're not stock, and the Irs tends to be
David Willbrand: pretty theological about these things. I hope I'm wrong. It'd be great if they just were treated as stock. I I hope that we get some relief from the Irs, and some clarity at some point that tells us that they are but until then it's it's uncertain. And investors and founders just need to be aware of that. But that's just really it's a. It's a technical issue. It can show up as a Qsps issue. As I mentioned, qualified small business stock.
David Willbrand: But the fundamental issue is the fake is a great instrument
David Willbrand: the amount
David Willbrand: cap discount. That's it. Good to go. So
David Willbrand: 30 seconds to spare.
David Willbrand: We covered a ton of ground. I didn't really leave time for questions at the end, as I'd hoped but we we were able to feather in a bunch during the conversation, which I'm really glad that we were able to and with that being said.
David Willbrand: let me stop my share. I would be happy to take any questions by email that anybody has. And I really appreciate the time with you all today, and I'm super excited and looking forward to meeting you in person.
George H: Steven.
George H: David, that was great. I just came back in and saw your beautiful work of art on the board. It looks great. You guys can email us questions. David, we'll see you. When's the next time we'll see you. When are you planning to come to galvanize in person?
David Willbrand: So we I need to get that sorted. But I think whenever you're in the office next, I will be there.
George H: Okay. Great. So week 6 in October after tech week.
George H: Great. Okay. Great. Well, we're excited. I'm excited for the founders to meet you virtually, and then in person.
David Willbrand: I'm looking forward to it, too. And this was this was fun, and, like, I said, happy to take any follow ups and congratulations on being admitted to the best accelerator program in the world. So onward and upward.
George H: Hey? Thanks for everything you do.
David Willbrand: Cheers.
George H: How's the recording.